---
title: Our Zapffean Biosophical Foundation
tags:
date: 11/24/24
---
The work of the Norwegian philosophy [Peter Wessel Zapffe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Wessel_Zapffe) (1899 - 1990) is, for the first time, gaining long overdue traction outside of Norway. Not least because of reference to his work in Thomas Ligotti’s masterpiece of philosophical pessimism [*The Conspiracy Against the Human Race*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Conspiracy_Against_the_Human_Race) and the further popularization of contents of said book via the character Rust Cohle in the first season of [*True Detective*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/True_Detective_season_1). Even historically without wide popularity, Zapffe’s short essay *Den sidste Messias* ([The Last Messiah](https://philosophynow.org/issues/45/The_Last_Messiah)) has, for many, solidified his place as one of – if not the – most pessimistic philosophers to draw breath. Before addressing the Zapffean biosophical perspective in full, in summary it can be understood via a single sentence from the aforementioned text, “[man is] a biological paradox, an abomination, an absurdity, an exaggeration of disastrous nature." (The Last Messiah). That is to say, our existence by its very nature affords us the ability to ontologically ask existential questions within a world that is inherently unable to provide answers for such questions. No amount of meaning *in* life will answer the question *of* life. I feel it important to add that Zapffe was a remarkable stylist and writer, yet where his academically philosophical writing is concerned (specifically [*Om det tragiske*](https://www.peterlang.com/document/1350283), a book in-part constructing the basis of the biosophical outlook) his style becomes terse, dry, and more akin to taking-something-to-court. If one desires a short, sharp, and cold Zapffean embrace, there is no better place to begin than *The Last Messiah* (linked above), followed by [*The Parable of the Cats*](https://pederanker.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/zapffe-the-parable-of-the-cats-1997.pdf). 

**Biosophy**

For Zapffe, biosophy is defined as ‘_a philosophy, a theoretical conception of existence, oriented towards biology and its related disciplines (palaeontology etc.), and therefore deals with every ‘problem’ in a completely empirical fashion_.’ ([Ecophilosophy in a World of Crisis](https://www.routledge.com/Ecophilosophy-in-a-World-of-Crisis-Critical-realism-and-the-Nordic-Contributions/Bhaskar-Naess-Hoyer/p/book/9780415692328), p74) it is a bio-philosophical approach to the investigation of the individual organism and its environment, the biological _priority_ of which addresses the basic kinship and conditions of all living organisms. With an initial Zapffean biosophical differentiation to the mere _observation_ of biological condition and environment with respect to the organism being founded upon the understanding that for each individual species, _“the ‘environment’ as perceived by the individual species, indeed the individual organism,is partly and possibly completely determined by the sensory properties of living organisms, possibly in association with a subjective rendering of the impressions.” (Ecophilosophy in a World of Crisis, p75)_ For Zapffe, by which an X can be determined is strictly dependent upon the properties, conditions, and abilities of any respective individual organism or species, therein positing structurally philosophical aims are secondary to the biosophical foundation of any perception, wherein that perception, as the faculty to apprehend the world is in itself structured/limited by the biology of the organism itself. The bilateral determination of the individual and the environment (directly influenced by the work [Jakob von Uexküll](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jakob_Johann_von_Uexk%C3%BCll)), for Zapffe, therein posits a determination of inner impressions. 

Following this, in a play on Berkeley’s _[esse et percipi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Berkeley#Contributions_to_philosophy),_ Zapffe puts forth the argument that _“The tenability of the thesis ‘esse et percipi’ (to be is to be perceived by a sentient being) must be judged (after specifying the idea) from a point outside ‘percipi’, from which an ‘esse’ can be observed with ‘percipi’. But we would then have refuted the thesis before we had an opportunity to compare the discovered ‘esse’ with its ‘perceptum’ and settle the identity question. Following Uexküll’s principle, the aphorism could be rephrased to greater advantage thus: ‘Anything but perceptum is beyond the scope of biology’s remit.’” (Ecophilosophy in a World of Crisis,_ p75) Though a critically overlooked aspect of Zapffe’s work in recent popular re/misenterpretations of his work, the priority of the biosophical over the solely philosophical as per man’s existential position within the cosmos structures his, that is man’s, existence in a Recursive sense.

The prioritisation of the biosophical view over the solely abstract philosophical view recursively draws _investigating_ man back to his biological roots which are themselves the only foundation. In bio-philosophizing, that is, philosophizing with biosophical priority, the ontological ‘possibilities’ of man’s existential investigations are never allowed the false expanse of a non-biological reality. That is, with regard to the aforementioned play on Berkeley’s _esse et percipi,_ the Zapffean approach posits that _esse et percipi_ is in itself disproved by the fact it can only be judged _from a point outside ‘percipi’, from which an ‘esse’ can be observed with ‘percipi’ (ibid)_ With this Berkeleyan self-defeating percipi itself being determined by the sense properties of the living organism in question. Though this appears as a gratuitous means to state that man’s existential investigations (that have only _perceptum_) are forever only from man himself (as organism), Zapffe’s biosophical re-approximation of this reality solidifies an ontic-ontological recursivity that, due to its biological foundation, is unable to be escaped or broken. Zapffe’s biosophical perspective at first glance appears as a simple prioritization of biology as a mere ‘level’ of being, wherein later abstraction will allow for apparently miraculous leaps between possibilities. Whereas, in truth, Zapffe is seeking to draw a distinct line around the organism that is ‘the human’’s capabilities _from within which_ further possibilities are not just found, but also biosophically _bound._

To further extrapolate on this biosophical binding, one could attempt an approximate synthesis of Darwin/evolution and Zapffe. Taking the prior Zapffean understanding of biological perceptum and of the environment and the individual organism’s co-determination as given, Zapffe (in _Om det tragdiske)_ outlines some fundamental features of the individual’s life:

1.  “The struggle for life”
    
2.  The successive states of an individual (stages of development, and thus growth and decay), proceed in a distinctive spatial and thus temporal manner
    
3.  The prior non-arbitrary succession of stages requires ‘vital balance’
    
4.  Vital balance is dependent on the creature’s own behaviour, inclusive of 
    
    1.  Automatic actions
        
    2.  Choices such as fight or flight
        
    3.  Fully conscious choices
        
5.  The will to preserve the vital balance (will-to-life)
    
6.  The individual exists within either a favorable or unfavorable environment in relation to the prior features
    
    1.  If the environment is unfavorable, the vital balance is destroyed and the individual dies
        
    2.  The creature adapts to the environment
        
    3.  An in-between state of crippled adaption, poor living
        
7.  Conditioned responses such as _aversion_ and (intensified) _pain_ regarding the vital balance are understood biologically as fulfilling the function of life-preservation.

Though this relationship, between an organism (man) and his environment, is a one-sided courtship, it is a courtship all the same, and thus not a dualism. This largely unilateral relationship, wherein the side of the ‘outside world’ is _indifferent_ is, for Zapffe, to man’s benefit, for there is no _counter-interest_ from the _world_ itself (this is not to speak of other species _within_ the world). Thus far, then, Zapffe’s grounding is largely solely biologically evolutionary through and through, with features 2 through 7 being easily subsumed under the adaptive process of feature 1. If one agrees that each feature given can be subsumed under the primary heading of 1. “The struggle for life”, and that heading is itself synonymous with what is understood as ‘natural selection’ or ‘survival of the fittest’, then it _appears_ that the Zapffe’s biosophical approach is little more than an abstraction atop evolutionary theory with some Uexkull thrown in for good measure. This would be untrue. The biosophical perspective/approach would, as per its foundation of biological _perceptum_, come prior to evolution in any epistemological sense. The truth regarding the claims of evolution aside, the very means to ascertain knowledge of evolution itself are dependent upon–in retrospect–Zapffe’s biosophical understanding. Biosophical evolution as such would simultaneously keep the reality of the observer _as part of evolution itself_ ‘in mind’ throughout investigation; akin to a bird taking notes regarding its cage from the inside, man studies evolution only ever via the happenstance that such a means _to_ study evolution arises from evolution’s own blind process.

As already mentioned, the approach to Zapffe’s work in English has been almost solely primarily via The Last Messiah or secondarily through the work of Thomas Ligotti in The Conspiracy Against the Human Race (within which is found an equal emphasis on The Last Messiah). This in turn has led, ironically, to a focus predominantly on the symptoms arising from the illness, as opposed to the illness itself. If, in a sentence, Zapffe’s work can be existentially understood as ‘No amount of meaning in life will answer the question of life.’, then it is that recent popular appeal has focused on Zapffe’s diagnosis of existential symptoms as opposed to his understanding of the ontological recursivity in itself. The Last Messiah is noted for Zapffe’s theorization of four remedies against ‘cosmic panic’: isolation, anchoring, distraction, and sublimation–each of which I will draw upon in later essays–as diagnostic terms for our current social reality. But as it stands, to focus on these four after-the-fact remedies is to brush past the curse itself in pursuit of a relative, ignorant comfort and safety.

Here, then, I can turn to the ‘illness’ itself, that is man’s tragic state amidst the cosmos. With Zapffe in On the Tragic, “Hoping to “disclose…whether the – for now hypothetical – tragic phenomenon is naturally linked to organic life as a whole, to human life in general, to certain categories of people, to individual human beings, or to occasionally occurring coincidences or courses.”  The foundations of organic life now – in brief – stated, we can begin to try to understand why, for Zapffe (and myself), such a biological situation is tragic and/or pessimistic. Man’s tragic situation has already been disclosed, and is biosophically ever in-front of us. To quote Silviya Serafimova’s [_OF THE “UNIVERSE’S HELPLESS CAPTIVE”. A GLIMPSE TO PETER WESSEL ZAPFFE’S PHILOSOPHICAL HERITAGE_](https://www.academia.edu/40196591/In_serach_of_the_Universes_Helpless_Captive_A_Glimpe_to_Peter_Wessel_Zapffes_Philosophical_Heritage)

“On a macro-methodological level, we argue that Zapffe’s concept of meaning _of_ life can be related to the process of perception, while the concept of meaning _in_ life can be interpreted in respect to essence. In this context, analyzing Berkeley’s formula “esse est percipi” within the framework of Zapffe’s theory demonstrates that meaninglessness _of_ life cannot be “softened” by looking for an existentially insufficient meaning _in_ life, taking into account that the latter cannot “fill” meaninglessness as such with a meaning when concerning human condition in existential terms.” (p43)

Biologically speaking, the human being’s consciousness is viewed by Zapffe as an overdevelopment, with the human itself “A breach in the very unity of life, a biological paradox, an abomination, an absurdity, an exaggeration of disastrous nature.” (The Last Messiah) A paradoxical being rooted in matter and yet able, with “new eyes”, to see matter as if a stranger to it. At this juncture, the notion of Recursivity can be understood as equal to this Zapffean rupture, a being able to assess its own being, but innate within that faculty as assessment is no answer to the question of Why _it_ is, or Why it _can_ assess altogether. Forever back upon itself as nothing more than it is, yet able to question the notion of its (self-imposed) potentiality of being more than it is, or whether it can even be more than it is. As such, Recursion is never singular, Recursion recurs infinitely within itself, yet each indexed recursion is never new if the bounds of the initial Recursion are biosophical.

To give my own metaphor: Imagine one is in a prison, in their own cell. There is a long row of cells each with its own respective prisoner of a different being, type, or species. Everyday the cells doors open and each prisoner has an _innately instinctive_ routine that he/she/it attends to as par-the-course of what it is to be that very prisoner in itself. One day, the human prisoner wakes up and finds _not_ that it desires to no longer do its routine–that it _has_ to do as per its nature (survival)--but that it can _question_ why it’s doing the routine at all. Very quickly the human prisoner begins to question the prison, the cell, its nature, etc. It develops concepts and ideas to try and articulate the issue. In the case of this scenario however, the Zapffean understanding would be that the prison has come about for no rhyme or reason, it has developed from a blind, biological process of selection, adaption, and survival, and so innate to the existence of the prison is the very fact of its will-less, reasonless, purposeless, and meaningless existence. From the ‘side’ of the prison, and _everything_ else ‘external’ to the prisoner, who is now _consciously_ co-determinate to the prison, there will _never_ be an answer for the fact that such a possibility of _reason_ altogether will never be. In this sense we can say that the human being is a cosmic captive _just because they are_. Any striving toward value, reason, or meaning where their respective purpose within or of the prison is concerned is de facto void in lieu of the prison’s original blindness. As such, any sincere striving toward an answer only ever ontologically Recurs as a question regarding the lack of an answer, _ad infinitum._ 

The human organism–as _of_ the world and matter–is the only organism that can conceptualize questions and, therefore, the _possibility_ of answers. Yet, in addressing its most fundamental, metaphysical questions at the _reasoning_ for ‘am’ (existence) of itself, it attempts to draw an answer from that (the universe) which has no means to understand what an ‘answer’ even is. To exist is to demand answers from a world that can never provide them.
